---
Created On: '2022-08-01T03:05:00+00:00'
Description: "Notes on \u201CGulliver's Travels\u201D by Jonathan Swift"
Last Edited: '2023-03-25T03:22:00+00:00'
Published On: null
Slug: gullivers-travels
Slug Override: gullivers-travels
Status: Published
Tags: []
Title: "\u201CGulliver\u2019s Travels\u201D by Jonathan Swift"
Type: Notes
notion_id: 08c6ff32-fdaa-4a2c-a550-87fbdc584ba5
notion_url: https://www.notion.so/Gulliver-s-Travels-by-Jonathan-Swift-08c6ff32fdaa4a2ca55087fbdc584ba5
---
<h2>Background</h2>
<p>Jonathan Swift was born in Dublin in 1667 and died in 1745.</p>
<p>He was a writer and cleric, and became the Dean of St Patrick’s Cathedral in Dublin. He was friends with Alexander Pope.</p>
<p><em>Gulliver’s Travels</em> was first published in 1726.</p>
<p>In each of Gulliver’s four journeys, the focus of Swift’s satire shifts.</p>
<p>Part I focuses on the pettiness of humankind. The king of Lilliput is referred to as the “delight and terror of the universe,” highlighting how small we are to God and the universe.</p>
<p>Part II focuses on the human body (although he exploring our vices too).</p>
<p>Part III focuses on the mind.</p>
<p>Part IV focuses on our immorality.</p>
<p>Here I collect my favorite quotes from the book.</p>
<h2>Part I: Lilliput</h2>
<p>The famous scene when Gulliver meets the little Lilliputians:</p>
<blockquote><p>
I lay down on the grass, which was very short and soft, where I slept
sounder than ever I remembered to have done in my life, and, as I
reckoned, about nine hours; for when I awaked, it was just day-light. I
attempted to rise, but was not able to stir: for, as I happened to lie
on my back, I found my arms and legs were strongly fastened on each side
to the ground; and my hair, which was long and thick, tied down in the
same manner. I likewise felt several slender ligatures across my body,
from my arm-pits to my thighs. I could only look upwards; the sun began
to grow hot, and the light offended my eyes. I heard a confused noise
about me; but in the posture I lay, could see nothing except the sky. In
a little time I felt something alive moving on my left leg, which
advancing gently forward over my breast, came almost up to my chin;
when, bending my eyes downwards as much as I could, I perceived it to be
a human creature not six inches high, with a bow and arrow in his hands,
and a quiver at his back. In the mean time, I felt at least forty more
of the same kind (as I conjectured) following the first.<br />
= (1.1)
</p></blockquote>

<p>The first of several discussions of excrement:</p>
<blockquote><p>
I had been for some hours extremely pressed by the necessities of
nature; which was no wonder, it being almost two days since I had last
disburdened myself. I was under great difficulties between urgency and
shame. The best expedient I could think of, was to creep into my house,
which I accordingly did; and shutting the gate after me, I went as far
as the length of my chain would suffer, and discharged my body of that
uneasy load. But this was the only time I was ever guilty of so
uncleanly an action; for which I cannot but hope the candid reader will
give some allowance, after he has maturely and impartially considered my
case, and the distress I was in. From this time my constant practice
was, as soon as I rose, to perform that business in open air, at the
full extent of my chain; and due care was taken every morning before
company came, that the offensive matter should be carried off in
wheel-barrows, by two servants appointed for that purpose. I would not
have dwelt so long upon a circumstance that, perhaps, at first sight,
may appear not very momentous, if I had not thought it necessary to
justify my character, in point of cleanliness, to the world; which, I am
told, some of my maligners have been pleased, upon this and other
occasions, to call in question.<br />
= (1.2)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
In the mean time the emperor held frequent councils, to debate what
course should be taken with me; and I was afterwards assured by a
particular friend, a person of great quality, who was as much in the
secret as any, that the court was under many difficulties concerning me.
They apprehended my breaking loose; that my diet would be very
expensive, and might cause a famine.<br />
= (1.2)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The natives came, by degrees, to be less apprehensive of any danger from
me. I would sometimes lie down, and let five or six of them dance on my
hand; and at last the boys and girls would venture to come and play at
hide-and-seek in my hair. I had now made a good progress in
understanding and speaking the language. The emperor had a mind one day
to entertain me with several of the country shows, wherein they exceed
all nations I have known, both for dexterity and magnificence. I was
diverted with none so much as that of the rope-dancers, performed upon a
slender white thread, extended about two feet, and twelve inches from
the ground. Upon which I shall desire liberty, with the reader’s
patience, to enlarge a little.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
Golbasto Momarem Evlame Gurdilo Shefin Mully Ully Gue, most mighty
Emperor of Lilliput, delight and terror of the universe, whose dominions
extend five thousand blustrugs (about twelve miles in circumference) to
the extremities of the globe; monarch of all monarchs, taller than the
sons of men; whose feet press down to the centre, and whose head strikes
against the sun; at whose nod the princes of the earth shake their
knees; pleasant as the spring, comfortable as the summer, fruitful as
autumn, dreadful as winter<br />
= (1.3)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
He began with compliments on my liberty; said “he might pretend to some
merit in it;” but, however, added, “that if it had not been for the
present situation of things at court, perhaps I might not have obtained
it so soon. For,” said he, “as flourishing a condition as we may appear
to be in to foreigners, we labour under two mighty evils: a violent
faction at home, and the danger of an invasion, by a most potent enemy,
from abroad.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
It is to be observed, that these ambassadors spoke to me, by an
interpreter, the languages of both empires differing as much from each
other as any two in Europe, and each nation priding itself upon the
antiquity, beauty, and energy of their own tongue, with an avowed
contempt for that of their neighbor<br />
= (1.5)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I heard the word Burglum repeated incessantly: several of the emperor’s
court, making their way through the crowd, entreated me to come
immediately to the palace, where her imperial majesty’s apartment was on
fire, by the carelessness of a maid of honor, who fell asleep while she
was reading a romance. I got up in an instant; and orders being given to
clear the way before me, and it being likewise a moonshine night, I made
a shift to get to the palace without trampling on any of the people. I
found they had already applied ladders to the walls of the apartment,
and were well provided with buckets, but the water was at some distance.
These buckets were about the size of large thimbles, and the poor people
supplied me with them as fast as they could: but the flame was so
violent that they did little good. I might easily have stifled it with
my coat, which I unfortunately left behind me for haste, and came away
only in my leathern jerkin. The case seemed wholly desperate and
deplorable; and this magnificent palace would have infallibly been burnt
down to the ground, if, by a presence of mind unusual to me, I had not
suddenly thought of an expedient. I had, the evening before, drunk
plentifully of a most delicious wine called glimigrim, (the
Blefuscudians call it flunec, but ours is esteemed the better sort,)
which is very diuretic. By the luckiest chance in the world, I had not
discharged myself of any part of it. The heat I had contracted by coming
very near the flames, and by laboring to quench them, made the wine
begin to operate by urine; which I voided in such a quantity, and
applied so well to the proper places, that in three minutes the fire was
wholly extinguished, and the rest of that noble pile, which had cost so
many ages in erecting, preserved from destruction.<br />
= (1.5)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
They bury their dead with their heads directly downward, because they
hold an opinion, that in eleven thousand moons they are all to rise
again; in which period the earth (which they conceive to be flat) will
turn upside down, and by this means they shall, at their resurrection,
be found ready standing on their feet. The learned among them confess
the absurdity of this doctrine; but the practice still continues, in
compliance to the vulgar.<br />
= (1.6)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
In choosing persons for all employments, they have more regard to good
morals than to great abilities; for, since government is necessary to
mankind, they believe, that the common size of human understanding is
fitted to some station or other; and that Providence never intended to
make the management of public affairs a mystery to be comprehended only
by a few persons of sublime genius, of which there seldom are three born
in an age: but they suppose truth, justice, temperance, and the like, to
be in every man’s power; the practice of which virtues, assisted by
experience and a good intention, would qualify any man for the service
of his country, except where a course of study is required. But they
thought the want of moral virtues was so far from being supplied by
superior endowments of the mind, that employments could never be put
into such dangerous hands as those of persons so qualified; and, at
least, that the mistakes committed by ignorance, in a virtuous
disposition, would never be of such fatal consequence to the public
weal, as the practices of a man, whose inclinations led him to be
corrupt, and who had great abilities to manage, to multiply, and defend
his corruptions.<br />
= (1.6)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
It was a custom introduced by this prince and his ministry (very
different, as I have been assured, from the practice of former times,)
that after the court had decreed any cruel execution, either to gratify
the monarch’s resentment, or the malice of a favorite, the emperor
always made a speech to his whole council, expressing his great lenity
and tenderness, as qualities known and confessed by all the world. This
speech was immediately published throughout the kingdom; nor did any
thing terrify the people so much as those encomiums on his majesty’s
mercy; because it was observed, that the more these praises were
enlarged and insisted on, the more inhuman was the punishment, and the
sufferer more innocent.<br />
= (1.7)
</p></blockquote>

<h2>Part 2: Brobdingnag</h2>
<blockquote><p>
I was endeavoring to find some gap in the hedge, when I discovered one
of the inhabitants in the next field, advancing towards the stile, of
the same size with him whom I saw in the sea pursuing our boat. He
appeared as tall as an ordinary spire steeple, and took about ten yards
at every stride, as near as I could guess. I was struck with the utmost
fear and astonishment, and ran to hide myself in the corn, whence I saw
him at the top of the stile looking back into the next field on the
right hand, and heard him call in a voice many degrees louder than a
speaking-trumpet: but the noise was so high in the air, that at first I
certainly thought it was thunder.<br />
= (2.1)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
for, as human creatures are observed to be more savage and cruel in
proportion to their bulk, what could I expect but to be a morsel in the
mouth of the first among these enormous barbarians that should happen to
seize me? Undoubtedly philosophers are in the right, when they tell us
that nothing is great or little otherwise than by comparison. It might
have pleased fortune, to have let the Lilliputians find some nation,
where the people were as diminutive with respect to them, as they were
to me. And who knows but that even this prodigious race of mortals might
be equally overmatched in some distant part of the world, whereof we
have yet no discovery.<br />
= (2.1)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
This prince took a pleasure in conversing with me, inquiring into the
manners, religion, laws, government, and learning of Europe; wherein I
gave him the best account I was able. His apprehension was so clear, and
his judgment so exact, that he made very wise reflections and
observations upon all I said. But I confess, that, after I had been a
little too copious in talking of my own beloved country, of our trade
and wars by sea and land, of our schisms in religion, and parties in the
state; the prejudices of his education prevailed so far, that he could
not forbear taking me up in his right hand, and stroking me gently with
the other, after a hearty fit of laughing, asked me, “whether I was a
whig or tory?” Then turning to his first minister, who waited behind him
with a white staff, near as tall as the mainmast of the Royal Sovereign,
he observed “how contemptible a thing was human grandeur, which could be
mimicked by such diminutive insects as I: and yet,” says he, “I dare
engage these creatures have their titles and distinctions of honor; they
contrive little nests and burrows, that they call houses and cities;
they make a figure in dress and equipage; they love, they fight, they
dispute, they cheat, they betray!” And thus he continued on, while my
color came and went several times, with indignation, to hear our noble
country, the mistress of arts and arms, the scourge of France, the
arbitress of Europe, the seat of virtue, piety, honor, and truth, the
pride and envy of the world, so contemptuously treated.<br />
= (2.3)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The maids of honor often invited Glumdalclitch to their apartments, and
desired she would bring me along with her, on purpose to have the
pleasure of seeing and touching me. They would often strip me naked from
top to toe, and lay me at full length in their bosoms; wherewith I was
much disgusted because, to say the truth, a very offensive smell came
from their skins; which I do not mention, or intend, to the disadvantage
of those excellent ladies, for whom I have all manner of respect; but I
conceive that my sense was more acute in proportion to my littleness,
and that those illustrious persons were no more disagreeable to their
lovers, or to each other, than people of the same quality are with us in
England. And, after all, I found their natural smell was much more
supportable, than when they used perfumes, under which I immediately
swooned away. I cannot forget, that an intimate friend of mine in
Lilliput, took the freedom in a warm day, when I had used a good deal of
exercise, to complain of a strong smell about me, although I am as
little faulty that way, as most of my sex: but I suppose his faculty of
smelling was as nice with regard to me, as mine was to that of this
people. Upon this point, I cannot forbear doing justice to the queen my
mistress, and Glumdalclitch my nurse, whose persons were as sweet as
those of any lady in England.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
When I attended the king after my recovery, to return him thanks for his
favours, he was pleased to rally me a good deal upon this adventure. He
asked me, “what my thoughts and speculations were, while I lay in the
monkey’s paw; how I liked the victuals he gave me; his manner of
feeding; and whether the fresh air on the roof had sharpened my
stomach.” He desired to know, “what I would have done upon such an
occasion in my own country.” I told his majesty, “that in Europe we had
no monkeys, except such as were brought for curiosity from other places,
and so small, that I could deal with a dozen of them together, if they
presumed to attack me. And as for that monstrous animal with whom I was
so lately engaged (it was indeed as large as an elephant), if my fears
had suffered me to think so far as to make use of my hanger,” (looking
fiercely, and clapping my hand on the hilt, as I spoke) “when he poked
his paw into my chamber, perhaps I should have given him such a wound,
as would have made him glad to withdraw it with more haste than he put
it in.” This I delivered in a firm tone, like a person who was jealous
lest his courage should be called in question. However, my speech
produced nothing else beside a loud laughter, which all the respect due
to his majesty from those about him could not make them contain. This
made me reflect, how vain an attempt it is for a man to endeavor to do
himself honor among those who are out of all degree of equality or
comparison with him. And yet I have seen the moral of my own behavior
very frequent in England since my return; where a little contemptible
varlet, without the least title to birth, person, wit, or common sense,
shall presume to look with importance, and put himself upon a foot with
the greatest persons of the kingdom.<br />
= (2.5)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
He [the king] was perfectly astonished with the historical account gave
him of our affairs during the last century; protesting “it was only a
heap of conspiracies, rebellions, murders, massacres, revolutions,
banishments, the very worst effects that avarice, faction, hypocrisy,
perfidiousness, cruelty, rage, madness, hatred, envy, lust, malice, and
ambition, could produce.”
</p></blockquote>

<h2>Part 3: Laputa, Balnibarbi, Luggnag, Glubdubdrib, and Japan</h2>
<blockquote><p>
Their heads were all reclined, either to the right, or the left; one of
their eyes turned inward, and the other directly up to the zenith. Their
outward garments were adorned with the figures of suns, moons, and
stars; interwoven with those of fiddles, flutes, harps, trumpets,
guitars, harpsichords, and many other instruments of music, unknown to
us in Europe. I observed, here and there, many in the habit of servants,
with a blown bladder, fastened like a flail to the end of a stick, which
they carried in their hands. In each bladder was a small quantity of
dried peas, or little pebbles, as I was afterwards informed. With these
bladders, they now and then flapped the mouths and ears of those who
stood near them, of which practice I could not then conceive the
meaning. It seems the minds of these people are so taken up with intense
speculations, that they neither can speak, nor attend to the discourses
of others, without being roused by some external action upon the organs
of speech and hearing; for which reason, those persons who are able to
afford it always keep a flapper (the original is climenole) in their
family, as one of their domestics; nor ever walk abroad, or make visits,
without him. And the business of this officer is, when two, three, or
more persons are in company, gently to strike with his bladder the mouth
of him who is to speak, and the right ear of him or them to whom the
speaker addresses himself. This flapper is likewise employed diligently
to attend his master in his walks, and upon occasion to give him a soft
flap on his eyes; because he is always so wrapped up in cogitation, that
he is in manifest danger of falling down every precipice, and bouncing
his head against every post; and in the streets, of justling others, or
being justled himself into the kennel.<br />
= (3.2)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
They are so perpetually alarmed with the apprehensions of these, and the
like impending dangers, that they can neither sleep quietly in their
beds, nor have any relish for the common pleasures and amusements of
life. When they meet an acquaintance in the morning, the first question
is about the sun’s health, how he looked at his setting and rising, and
what hopes they have to avoid the stroke of the approaching comet. This
conversation they are apt to run into with the same temper that boys
discover in delighting to hear terrible stories of spirits and
hobgoblins, which they greedily listen to, and dare not go to bed for
fear.<br />
= (3.2)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The women of the island have abundance of vivacity: they contemn their
husbands, and are exceedingly fond of strangers, whereof there is always
a considerable number from the continent below, attending at court,
either upon affairs of the several towns and corporations, or their own
particular occasions, but are much despised, because they want the same
endowments. Among these the ladies choose their gallants: but the
vexation is, that they act with too much ease and security; for the
husband is always so rapt in speculation, that the mistress and lover
may proceed to the greatest familiarities before his face, if he be but
provided with paper and implements, and without his flapper at his
side.<br />
= (3.2)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The sum of his discourse was to this effect: “That about forty years
ago, certain persons went up to Laputa, either upon business or
diversion, and, after five months continuance, came back with a very
little smattering in mathematics, but full of volatile spirits acquired
in that airy region: that these persons, upon their return, began to
dislike the management of every thing below, and fell into schemes of
putting all arts, sciences, languages, and mechanics, upon a new foot.
To this end, they procured a royal patent for erecting an academy of
projectors in Lagado; and the humor prevailed so strongly among the
people, that there is not a town of any consequence in the kingdom
without such an academy. In these colleges the professors contrive new
rules and methods of agriculture and building, and new instruments, and
tools for all trades and manufactures; whereby, as they undertake, one
man shall do the work of ten; a palace may be built in a week, of
materials so durable as to last for ever without repairing. All the
fruits of the earth shall come to maturity at whatever season we think
fit to choose, and increase a hundred fold more than they do at present;
with innumerable other happy proposals. The only inconvenience is, that
none of these projects are yet brought to perfection; and in the mean
time, the whole country lies miserably waste, the houses in ruins, and
the people without food or clothes. By all which, instead of being
discouraged, they are fifty times more violently bent upon prosecuting
their schemes, driven equally on by hope and despair.”<br />
= (3.4)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
There was a most ingenious architect, who had contrived a new method for
building houses, by beginning at the roof, and working downward to the
foundation; which he justified to me, by the like practice of those two
prudent insects, the bee and the spider.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I was complaining of a small fit of the colic, upon which my conductor
led me into a room where a great physician resided, who was famous for
curing that disease, by contrary operations from the same instrument. He
had a large pair of bellows, with a long slender muzzle of ivory: this
he conveyed eight inches up the anus, and drawing in the wind, he
affirmed he could make the guts as lank as a dried bladder. But when the
disease was more stubborn and violent, he let in the muzzle while the
bellows were full of wind, which he discharged into the body of the
patient; then withdrew the instrument to replenish it, clapping his
thumb strongly against the orifice of then fundament; and this being
repeated three or four times, the adventitious wind would rush out,
bringing the noxious along with it, (like water put into a pump), and
the patient recovered. I saw him try both experiments upon a dog, but
could not discern any effect from the former. After the latter the
animal was ready to burst, and made so violent a discharge as was very
offensive to me and my companion. The dog died on the spot, and we left
the doctor endeavoring to recover him, by the same operation.<br />
= (3.5)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The other project was, a scheme for entirely abolishing all words
whatsoever; and this was urged as a great advantage in point of health,
as well as brevity. For it is plain, that every word we speak is, in
some degree, a diminution of our lungs by corrosion, and, consequently,
contributes to the shortening of our lives. An expedient was therefore
offered, “that since words are only names for things, it would be more
convenient for all men to carry about them such things as were necessary
to express a particular business they are to discourse on.” And this
invention would certainly have taken place, to the great ease as well as
health of the subject, if the women, in conjunction with the vulgar and
illiterate, had not threatened to raise a rebellion unless they might be
allowed the liberty to speak with their tongues, after the manner of
their forefathers; such constant irreconcilable enemies to science are
the common people. However, many of the most learned and wise adhere to
the new scheme of expressing themselves by things; which has only this
inconvenience attending it, that if a man’s business be very great, and
of various kinds, he must be obliged, in proportion, to carry a greater
bundle of things upon his back, unless he can afford one or two strong
servants to attend him. I have often beheld two of those sages almost
sinking under the weight of their packs, like pedlars among us, who,
when they met in the street, would lay down their loads, open their
sacks, and hold conversation for an hour together; then put up their
implements, help each other to resume their burdens, and take their
leave.<br />
= (3.5)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I desired to see Alexander the Great at the head of his army, just after
the battle of Arbela: which, upon a motion of the governor’s finger,
immediately appeared in a large field, under the window where we stood.
Alexander was called up into the room: it was with great difficulty that
I understood his Greek, and had but little of my own. He assured me upon
his honor “that he was not poisoned, but died of a bad fever by
excessive drinking.”
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
Having a desire to see those ancients who were most renowned for wit and
learning, I set apart one day on purpose. I proposed that Homer and
Aristotle might appear at the head of all their commentators; but these
were so numerous, that some hundreds were forced to attend in the court,
and outward rooms of the palace. I knew, and could distinguish those two
heroes, at first sight, not only from the crowd, but from each other.
Homer was the taller and comelier person of the two, walked very erect
for one of his age, and his eyes were the most quick and piercing I ever
beheld. Aristotle stooped much, and made use of a staff. His visage was
meagre, his hair lank and thin, and his voice hollow. I soon discovered
that both of them were perfect strangers to the rest of the company, and
had never seen or heard of them before; and I had a whisper from a ghost
who shall be nameless, “that these commentators always kept in the most
distant quarters from their principals, in the lower world, through a
consciousness of shame and guilt, because they had so horribly
misrepresented the meaning of those authors to posterity.” I introduced
Didymus and Eustathius to Homer, and prevailed on him to treat them
better than perhaps they deserved, for he soon found they wanted a
genius to enter into the spirit of a poet. But Aristotle was out of all
patience with the account I gave him of Scotus and Ramus, as I presented
them to him; and he asked them, “whether the rest of the tribe were as
great dunces as themselves?”<br />
= (3.8)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The despatch came from court about the time we expected. It contained a
warrant for conducting me and my retinue to Traldragdubh, or
Trildrogdrib (for it is pronounced both ways as near as I can remember),
by a party of ten horse. All my retinue was that poor lad for an
interpreter, whom I persuaded into my service, and, at my humble
request, we had each of us a mule to ride on. A messenger was despatched
half a day’s journey before us, to give the king notice of my approach,
and to desire, “that his majesty would please to appoint a day and hour,
when it would by his gracious pleasure that I might have the honor to
lick the dust before his footstool.” This is the court style, and I
found it to be more than matter of form: for, upon my admittance two
days after my arrival, I was commanded to crawl upon my belly, and lick
the floor as I advanced; but, on account of my being a stranger, care
was taken to have it made so clean, that the dust was not offensive.
However, this was a peculiar grace, not allowed to any but persons of
the highest rank, when they desire an admittance. Nay, sometimes the
floor is strewed with dust on purpose, when the person to be admitted
happens to have powerful enemies at court; and I have seen a great lord
with his mouth so crammed, that when he had crept to the proper distance
from the throne; he was not able to speak a word. Neither is there any
remedy; because it is capital for those, who receive an audience to spit
or wipe their mouths in his majesty’s presence. There is indeed another
custom, which I cannot altogether approve of: when the king has a mind
to put any of his nobles to death in a gentle indulgent manner, he
commands the floor to be strewed with a certain brown powder of a deadly
composition, which being licked up, infallibly kills him in twenty-four
hours. But in justice to this prince’s great clemency, and the care he
has of his subjects’ lives (wherein it were much to be wished that the
Monarchs of Europe would imitate him), it must be mentioned for his
honor, that strict orders are given to have the infected parts of the
floor well washed after every such execution, which, if his domestics
neglect, they are in danger of incurring his royal displeasure. I myself
heard him give directions, that one of his pages should be whipped,
whose turn it was to give notice about washing the floor after an
execution, but maliciously had omitted it; by which neglect a young lord
of great hopes, coming to an audience, was unfortunately poisoned,
although the king at that time had no design against his life. But this
good prince was so gracious as to forgive the poor page his whipping,
upon promise that he would do so no more, without special orders.<br />
= (3.9)
</p></blockquote>

<p>An interesting scene where Swift expands on why he would want to live forever. I was disappointed that he didn't explore this further, and instead took the easy way out of the discussion by having the immortal struldbrugs become old and senile.</p>
<blockquote><p>
One day, in much good company, I was asked by a person of quality,
“whether I had seen any of their struldbrugs, or immortals?” I said, “I
had not;” and desired he would explain to me “what he meant by such an
appellation, applied to a mortal creature.” He told me “that sometimes,
though very rarely, a child happened to be born in a family, with a red
circular spot in the forehead, directly over the left eyebrow, which was
an infallible mark that it should never die.” The spot, as he described
it, “was about the compass of a silver threepence, but in the course of
time grew larger, and changed its color; for at twelve years old it
became green, so continued till five and twenty, then turned to a deep
blue: at five and forty it grew coal black, and as large as an English
shilling; but never admitted any further alteration.” He said, “these
births were so rare, that he did not believe there could be above eleven
hundred struldbrugs, of both sexes, in the whole kingdom; of which he
computed about fifty in the metropolis, and, among the rest, a young
girl born; about three years ago: that these productions were not
peculiar to any family, but a mere effect of chance; and the children of
the struldbrugs themselves were equally mortal with the rest of the
people.”
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
To this I added another petition, “that for the sake of my patron the
king of Luggnagg, his majesty would condescend to excuse my performing
the ceremony imposed on my countrymen, of trampling upon the crucifix:
because I had been thrown into his kingdom by my misfortunes, without
any intention of trading.” When this latter petition was interpreted to
the Emperor, he seemed a little surprised; and said, “he believed I was
the first of my countrymen who ever made any scruple in this point; and
that he began to doubt, whether I was a real Hollander, or not; but
rather suspected I must be a Christian.<br />
= (3.11)
</p></blockquote>

<h2>Part 4: Houyhnhnms</h2>
<blockquote><p>
The horse immediately ordered a white mare servant of his family to
bring me a good quantity of oats in a sort of wooden tray. These I
heated before the fire, as well as I could, and rubbed them till the
husks came off, which I made a shift to winnow from the grain. I ground
and beat them between two stones; then took water, and made them into a
paste or cake, which I toasted at the fire and eat warm with milk. It
was at first a very insipid diet, though common enough in many parts of
Europe, but grew tolerable by time; and having been often reduced to
hard fare in my life, this was not the first experiment I had made how
easily nature is satisfied.<br />
= (4.2)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I therefore told my master, “that in the country whence I came, those of
my kind always covered their bodies with the hairs of certain animals
prepared by art, as well for decency as to avoid the inclemencies of
air, both hot and cold; of which, as to my own person, I would give him
immediate conviction, if he pleased to command me: only desiring his
excuse, if I did not expose those parts that nature taught us to
conceal.” He said, “my discourse was all very strange, but especially
the last part; for he could not understand, why nature should teach us
to conceal what nature had given; that neither himself nor family were
ashamed of any parts of their bodies; but, however, I might do as I
pleased.”<br />
= (4.3)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I therefore told my master, “that in the country whence I came, those of
my kind always covered their bodies with the hairs of certain animals
prepared by art, as well for decency as to avoid the inclemencies of
air, both hot and cold; of which, as to my own person, I would give him
immediate conviction, if he pleased to command me: only desiring his
excuse, if I did not expose those parts that nature taught us to
conceal.” He said, “my discourse was all very strange, but especially
the last part; for he could not understand, why nature should teach us
to conceal what nature had given; that neither himself nor family were
ashamed of any parts of their bodies; but, however, I might do as I
pleased.”<br />
= (4.5)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I could not forbear shaking my head, and smiling a little at his
ignorance. And being no stranger to the art of war, I gave him a
description of cannons, culverins, muskets, carabines, pistols, bullets,
powder, swords, bayonets, battles, sieges, retreats, attacks,
undermines, countermines, bombardments, sea fights, ships sunk with a
thousand men, twenty thousand killed on each side, dying groans, limbs
flying in the air, smoke, noise, confusion, trampling to death under
horses’ feet, flight, pursuit, victory; fields strewed with carcases,
left for food to dogs and wolves and birds of prey; plundering,
stripping, ravishing, burning, and destroying. And to set forth the
valor of my own dear countrymen, I assured him, “that I had seen them
blow up a hundred enemies at once in a siege, and as many in a ship, and
beheld the dead bodies drop down in pieces from the clouds, to the great
diversion of the spectators.”
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
I assured his honor, “that the law was a science in which I had not much
conversed, further than by employing advocates, in vain, upon some
injustices that had been done me: however, I would give him all the
satisfaction I was able.”
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
The many virtues of those excellent quadrupeds, placed in opposite view
to human corruptions, had so far opened my eyes and enlarged my
understanding, that I began to view the actions and passions of man in a
very different light, and to think the honor of my own kind not worth
managing; which, besides, it was impossible for me to do, before a
person of so acute a judgment as my master, who daily convinced me of a
thousand faults in myself, whereof I had not the least perception
before, and which, with us, would never be numbered even among human
infirmities. I had likewise learned, from his example, an utter
detestation of all falsehood or disguise; and truth appeared so amiable
to me, that I determined upon sacrificing every thing to it.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
When I had answered all his questions, and his curiosity seemed to be
fully satisfied, he sent for me one morning early, and commanded me to
sit down at some distance (an honor which he had never before conferred
upon me). He said, “he had been very seriously considering my whole
story, as far as it related both to myself and my country; that he
looked upon us as a sort of animals, to whose share, by what accident he
could not conjecture, some small pittance of reason had fallen, whereof
we made no other use, than by its assistance, to aggravate our natural
corruptions, and to acquire new ones, which nature had not given us;
that we disarmed ourselves of the few abilities she had bestowed; had
been very successful in multiplying our original wants, and seemed to
spend our whole lives in vain endeavors to supply them by our own
inventions.<br />
= (4.7)
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote><p>
Thus, gentle reader, I have given thee a faithful history of my travels
for sixteen years and above seven months: wherein I have not been so
studious of ornament as of truth. I could, perhaps, like others, have
astonished thee with strange improbable tales; but I rather chose to
relate plain matter of fact, in the simplest manner and style; because
my principal design was to inform, and not to amuse thee.
</p></blockquote>
